---
layout: post
title: "One Story issues 313 to 323"
date: 2025-04-07
tags: reading-journal
---

I was way behind on the magazine, after coming out of something of a reading slump. Issue 319 appears to have been lost in the post and I didn't get to read it.
# Issue 313 - Daniel Torday - HD/DH

A poet and a novelist that have been exchanging letters meet. 

I wasn’t sure how I felt about this. In a 
good way, I think. I was surprised to flip to the cover when I finished and discovered the author was a man (I even went as far as searching for them to make sure I wasn’t being presumptuous about the name). Hilda was written with a very convincingly womanly voice, or at least convincingly enough to fool boring old cis-het me. 

Although I know I probably won’t because I rarely go back to things, I feel like this was deserving of a second read. It was evocative of something I’m not sure I can completely place. There felt like there was more not being discussed under the surface.

The final image really sat with me though. We’ve got these two writers who don’t have an angry fuck after winding each other up, even after dropping all the pretence, and instead they both go back to writing in the same room. Then we learn that there is a war going on and Hilda opens the window to hear gunshots. Is the war happening in London now? 

For me this brought up a lot of thoughts about how (at least some) writers talk about writing, as a sort of cultural vanguard or spear that drives bravely into the heart of the day and how books and literature are a vital part of resisting or questioning the zeitgeist – although usually writers who say things like this have the humility not claim it about their own. I certainly think some writing can have a great cultural impact, but there was something about this image that made me think about how self-indulgent creative activities can be. I think that is a crucial part of what makes creativity so enriching to engage in, and it’s a huge part of why I enjoy being creative. But this image really made the idea of the valiant writer seem even more self-indulgent. That the poet could bring down the reigime and make us give piece a chance with one well composed stanza. 

It’s worth saying that the two writers are not presented as seeing their own writing in this way, that’s something I have brought in as a reaction. But it still felt like the author was less saying something, more asking me to reflect on something about justifying creativity in times of turmoil.

There was also something interesting, and different to this, in the differentiation of the two narrative voices. It felt more than just stylistic difference, but entirely separate world views and thought patterns - something I think a lot of people toying with multiple perspectives fail at since they end up writing in just their own voice with a different sprinkling of style over the top. 

While Hilda felt like the central character, I think I found Lorenzo more compelling in how contemptible he was. He represented well that angry wounded type who struggles with criticism because it threatens their unstable self-image.

For something I initially thought I hadn’t enjoyed that much, this was a lot to write.

# Issue 314 - Sanjena Sathian - The Love Lives of Gods and Ghosts

Synopsis: Reshma returns from India to sort out a retirement home for her mother following her father’s passing.

It took me a few pages to get into the headspace for this (I think this is more about me struggling to get into a reading mode in the mornings) but it suddenly really got to me.

There is this great sense of loss that pervades it, and it’s not even really about the loss of Reshma’s father. There’s the reality of her own mother’s aging and the fact she now lives half a world away and can’t be there for it. But I think the real sense of loss is more about how we can’t get the past back. The India of Resha’s childhood is gone and inaccessible, not just because India has changed but because she has changed and is changing. And then there’s the further loss of looking back on your childhood without the innocence of being a child. It felt mournful. 

# Issue 315 - William Lohier - Drapetomania 
An epidemic or manic running hits the states and it emerges that it only affects Black communities.

This one slotted into that sort of slightly surreal speculative fiction slot that made it a really easy read for me. It balanced its core emotional notes really naturally: there was a mix of romance, grief and fear that it moved between in a way that never felt jarring. 

It begs the question of what are they running towards or from? But it makes it clear, without stating it outright, that victims seem to end up running in circles often; though not always. But the running is largely presented as running for the sake of running. Which is something that leaves me really pondering. It’s a difficult image. I’m obviously not even American, let alone a Black American. Anything I know about that community and its struggles are unavoidably observed from a distance by nature. But I always felt like literature, art and film by Black creators were as close as I was ever going to get at glimpsing anything, especially when I am presented with something I can’t get immediately or clashes with what my intuition wants to predict. My intuition is obviously shallow and miscalibrated and that’s what makes any work by someone with experiences so different from mine enjoyable.

# Issue 316 – Molly Anders – A Straightforward Matter
A man drink drives to a game of bridge and manages to make an even worse mistake.

This one was weirdly fun despite being about a total disaster of a person. Something in the voice made the lack of remorse silly. Though I came more and more to see it as deflection. It escalates when the car accident the narrator had while drink driving on the way to play bridge is revealed to have been a hit and run on a person, from which their police friend protects them. In general his friends seem to really shelter and try to look after the narrator, as is implied with them trying to set him up on dates and having sorted previous drink driving accidents for him. But then it also seems like they maybe just don't think its a big deal at all since they drink drive themselves later despite one of them being police. 

The final image of him fantasising about being in prison but being forgiven by the 16 year old he slept with is described as “better than freedom”. It feels like all the deflection and drinking are really masking a huge amount of guilt and self-loathing.

# Issue 317 - Devon Halliday - Nothing That Counts
A professor sees a student he has been flirting with talk to his wife, and is left to guess how much she knows.

This was a really intense and dramatic read, it really packed a lot into so few words. I don’t avoid spoilers in these notes so cover your eyes if you think you will read it.

The main pov character, Frank, starts as deeply unsympathetic in that you know he has had an affair of some kind, and he is trying to get out of the conflict he anticipates with his wife who is being, what he interprets, as very cold and stand-off-ish. But as he probes her and tries to figure out what she does or doesn't know, it becomes apparent she is having some sort of neurological episode and her memory is off. She is unable to remember other events of the evening and seems to be getting dates wrong.

Frank is then overcome with concern for his wife, and they end the social activities of the evening early to go to hospital, in which he is told she will likely come out of it within 6-8 hours. The rising concern worked to make me feel dramatically more sympathetic to him, though still not a fan.

But this is when he chooses to confess to his wife, when he knows she won’t remember. Back to shite bag.

Really well executed manipulation of the reader.

# Issue 318 - Nate Brown - The Sea of Cortés
A couple track the decline of the whale population from a remote outpost which they are eventually forced to share.

Ecological disaster fiction is something that it’s hard not to notice. I don’t feel like it’s over done, though it feels like there could be so much more out there that falls into all the expected traps and ends up never reaching me. I find it a tough read. The helplessness is always a theme and I hate being reminded of my own helplessness in the face of it all. It’s an uncomfortable sensation to sit with.

The story is backed by a fertility crisis that is affecting people too. Up to the point where women and their partners are classed as “viable” and better benefits are bestowed upon those who have the potential to bear children. But this bleak backdrop served to contrast against the slightly hopeful zest for life the characters still had. It ended with the narrator’s husband leaving with the younger woman sent to their outpost when she becomes pregnant and while she lets herself feel some sorrow about it, she ultimately sees it as good and correct because humanity is so in need of children.

This affected me quite a bit. I initially felt that I didn’t like it or care for it as a story but as I reflect on it more I realise I was rejecting it for how uncomfortable it made me. A little discomfort can be good sometimes.

# Issue 320 - Jeneé Skinner - Shadow Memories

A woman learns to confront the trauma of her upbringing by her mother through connecting with her spirituality.

This is one that I felt passed me by somewhat. The prose was really rich and full of imagery but the core theme of surviving an overbearing upbringing by a mentally ill mother using her Christian faith as justification for her actions was something I struggled to connect with. I don’t think this was through any fault of the writers but the deficit in my personal experiences (for which I feel very grateful). I was raised completely agnostic and spiritual things simply never really came up in my home, other than me knowing my mother was raised Catholic and my grandparents still were.

I do think it illustrated the way in which trauma can beget more trauma though, and how difficult breaking out of that cycle can be.

# Issue 321 - Lauren K. Watel - Trampoline

A woman jumps it out to reconnect with life.

I connected with this one a lot, despite having never been a mother. Depression was something that hung over me for years, close to two decades, and I find a lot of mental illness in writing and film and theatre and any kind of narrative form to often be very unsatisfying. I feel like only prose or poetry can ever get close, and it often doesn’t. But I felt this did, at least to a specific aspect of the experience. Maybe that is why so much fails for me? It tries to capture it in its entirety and maybe you can’t. But this focused, towards the end, on the frustration. On the intense want and desire to not feel like this so you can go back to living. I remember being in a near rage at times at myself (“depression is anger turned inwards”) because I felt like I wasn’t participating in my own life. But it also captured the way that things can be so contradictory in feeling like a blessing  and burden at the same time. And how you can hate that you let yourself feel its a burden, like it was some sort of crime to do so.

# Issue 322 - Randy F. Nelson - Woman from Khao Lak

A former lifeguard remembers the summer where an older woman joined the lifeguard team.

I found the voice on this one irresistible and immediately gripping. Very conversational. Filled with deceptively simple observations by the narrator that painted a rich picture of the characters, especially the woman being recalled.

It played up the mystery of what she was up to and what she was getting out of volunteering as a lifeguard instructor with a bunch of teenagers really well as the boys fawn over her and they hope for something of a Mrs Robinson situation but it becomes clear there is some deeper emotional need she is trying to fulfil, and in a very unhealthy way. The title itself plays into the mystery well.

I’m often not into the sort of “one summer when I was younger” type of stories, but this one felt more like a haunting.
# Issue 323 - Nini Berndt - Empress

A woman goes on a cruise to attend the wedding of a former affair partner.

Affairs are one of those literary fiction tropes/themes that show up so often, I wonder how many writers have had or been the victims of them? Are there more affairs going on around me than I realise? Maybe it’s more likely that it’s a charged topic. I definitely struggle to find much sympathy for characters that are wallowing in their post-affair slump. It’s a hard bias for me to overcome. I found it tough to tell how much was real unreliable narrator and how much of my reading was my own bias. 

It was an interesting set-up though. Her former affair partner is marrying the other woman he was seeing at the same time as the narrator, and has now gone on to great success while the narrator describes moving in and out from their parents five times, as well as ascribing at least some blame for their lack of success to their birth year. I felt a current of something not as extreme as self-loathing, but at least a discontent that was difficult to face. 

A portrait of someone stuck in place.
